## Biographical sketch
### Table of Contents
* [The first major Australian poet](#FMAP)
* [Early life and then Sydney](#ELTS)
* [Harpur’s character, outlook and politics](#HCOP)
* [Marriage and later life](#MLL)
* [Newspaper poet](#NP)
* [Author of a ‘Poetical Works’](#APW)

### <a name=FMAP></a>The first major Australian poet

Born in 1813 in colonial New South Wales only twenty-five years after European settlement, Charles Harpur was Australia’s first important native-born poet. 

He was not the very first, however, for a couple of others preceded him. W. C. Wentworth was probably the first, if being born at sea in 1790 between Sydney and Norfolk Island qualifies him for the honour. Also in question is the extent to which Wentworth may be considered a poet. His well-known poem ‘Australasia’, written in 1823 while a student in Cambridge, seems nearly to have exhausted his muse. Colonial politics beckoned and would consume him. 

Charles Tompson was born in Sydney in 1807, six years before Harpur. The AustLit database records his first poem as being published in 1823. In 1826 he published his chief work, *Wild Notes from the Lyre of a Native Minstrel*, the first volume of verse written by a native-born poet to be published in Australia. Harpur’s father subscribed for two copies of it. Thereafter Tompson prudently accepted the rewards of a post in the public service and, in 1832, 100 acres of land from Governor Brisbane in recognition of his efforts.

### <a name=FLTS></a>Early life and then Sydney
No such generous public acknowledgement of his contribution to colonial society was in store for Charles Harpur. Poetry would have to be its own reward. He was born at Windsor on the Hawkesbury River, some 60 kilometres north-west of Sydney. The township was (and is) picturesquely located on the fertile plains below the Blue Mountains, which loom to the west. Harpur enjoyed what might be called the Wordsworthian advantage, with a boyhood spent amidst unspoiled natural beauty. He had the benefit of a schoolmaster-father who, although himself an ex-convict, must have looked to his son’s education. The young Harpur must have also had access to some good private library, perhaps that of the successful colonial figure, the Reverend Samuel Marsden, who had baptised him. 

By the time Harpur came to live in Sydney in 1833 after some periods on the Hunter River to the north he was sufficiently well read to be able to take part almost immediately in the nascent literary culture of the day, one that would begin to flourish in the 1840s. He began contributing poems to the Sydney newspapers from 1833, and he secured a job in the post office as a letter-sorter and later as a clerk. He would not have had access to books in the expensive and exclusive Australian Subscription Library and Reading Room, Sydney’s first significant public library, which opened in 1827 with 1,000 volumes. But the library of the new Sydney Mechanics’ School of Arts, established in 1833, would have been available to him.

On 7 April 1838 at the inaugural meeting of the Literary and Debating Society held nearby, Harpur seems to have had a falling-out with the young James Martin (1820–86), who would much later become Premier and Chief Justice. This scenario, proposed by Harpur’s biographer J. Normington Rawling in 1962, is suggested by Martin’s *Australian Sketch-Book*; it appeared two months later on 10 July 1838. In an essay in allegory form called ‘The Pseudo-Poets’ various local versifiers in thinly veiled disguise are parodied when judged by Apollo. So Tompson has his poet’s licence refused, and Henry Halloran, who worked at the Surveyor General’s office and published verse in the local newspapers, is judged to have shown some gleams of talent but obscured by his laziness in composition.

The figure based on Harpur – whose talent for poetic composition is not denied – is nevertheless ridiculed for his lack of cultivation and for his vanity. All three – ‘tender-hearted, love-sick swains’ – are ticked off for concentrating too much on love poems. [(1)](#FN1) There was some justice in this jibe as regards Harpur’s earlier poems, but his scope was already expanding. Extracts from an early version of what would become his play *The Bushrangers* (1853) had appeared in 1835 in the Sydney Monitor as ‘The Tragedy of Donohue’.

### <a name=HCOP></a>Harpur’s character, outlook and politics
Falling out with people became something of a habit for Harpur. Even in his twenties he was a proud and upright man, with a prickly dignity that grew from his devotion to his vocation as he saw it. He was jealous of the importance for a young colony of the literary tradition into which he had read his way and of which he would soon become an intelligent critic. Inevitably adopting inherited literary attitudes and diction until he could find his own, Harpur’s poetry would be deeply in tune with the contemporary taste for wild nature and the sublime. Although he would never become a radical original in his poetry, he was easily able to master eighteenth-century verse forms. He was equally at home with the blank verse of the Romantics, with its flexible imitation of the tones of the speaking voice and the inner rhythms of thought. These talents he saw to be at the disposal of the shared colonial experience of a natural antipodean world that needed to be given poetic expression. He would carry his readers with him. This would be his vocation, about which he was and would remain both serious and high-minded.

But he was not only high-minded. Although he was heavily influenced by English and, from the 1840s, American book culture, his years in Sydney meant that, in the newspapers, he soon became adept at scrapping in verse with his opponents, especially those he despised. He could be witheringly satirical and, at times, quite amusing. Of Emancipist (ex-convict) stock himself, he was the natural enemy of the Exclusivists who separated themselves from those with the convict taint. Harpur would take particular delight in skewering the pretensions of the large landholding ‘squatters’, as they were called.

Harpur’s evolving prose notes to his poems are significant here. Over the years, Harpur republished many of his newspaper poems in other newspapers, often adding notes to each new printing, or revising the existing ones. The notes are occasionally more interesting than the poems themselves. They constituted an attempt on his part to key the poems into the changing political and cultural agendas of the day.

In today’s terms his colony made up a small society indeed. In 1838 the total non-Aboriginal population of New South Wales was only about 90,000. Thirty years later, by the time of Harpur’s death in 1868, it had grown a remarkable fivefold, but it had still not quite reached half a million. In the same year, the population of the newer, sister colony Victoria was about fifty per cent bigger, inflated by immigration to its rich goldfields. As far as is known, however, Harpur never left New South Wales.

Henry (later, Sir Henry) Parkes, himself a poet, the future premier of New South Wales and ‘Father’ of the Australian Federation, arrived in Sydney in 1839, the year in which Harpur resigned his government post. Parkes seems not to have met Harpur until 1844 as the latter was backwards and forwards between Sydney and his older brother Joseph Jehoshaphat Harpur’s farm near Singleton on the Hunter River. It lay about 200 kilometres north of Sydney, located (once again, for Harpur) on fertile river-plains overlooked by towering hills. 

In 1844, having been reading Harpur’s poems published in the newly established *Weekly Register*, Parkes sent him a copy of Percy Bysshe Shelley’s complete poems, in the edition of 1840 edited by Mary Shelley. Judging from his correspondence with Parkes, Harpur seems to have taken this as a sign – a recognition of his talent and an endorsement of his chosen direction in life. W. A. Duncan, who had established the *Weekly Register* in 1843, Parkes and, some years later, the younger Daniel Deniehy (born in 1828) would be Harpur’s natural allies, located at the radical end of the spectrum in the turbulent political discourse of the day. 

During the 1840s and 1850s Harpur became involved in several of Parkes’s agendas. These included opposition to proposals to revive the transportation of convicts to the Australian colonies; the campaign to liberalise the land regulations in order to open up to poorer, would-be small landholders the land occupied by the squatters; and the terms of the proposed (limited) self-government for New South Wales. At a time when ‘Australia’ was only, officially, a geographical denominator, Harpur gave the term a more freighted meaning. An Australian patriot, he was soon preaching republican, as opposed to monarchist, politics in the vain attempt to secure independence from Britain for the still-young colony. He signed one of his manuscript volumes resonantly: ‘Charles Harpur/ An Australian’. 

In his republican endeavours Harpur was joined by Deniehy and the Reverend John Dunmore Lang. Harpur’s native capacity for abstract thought drew him towards this political ideal. He was living, as he saw it, in a corrupt society in which rewards were periodically doled out, but rarely to those from convict stock and especially not to one like himself who could not help but rock the boat. He seems to have had something of the martyr’s instinct about him.

Harpur’s satires, squibs and rhyming criticisms gave play to this side of his personality. Always witty, they parade a scorn that half-reveals and half-suppresses an underlying seriousness of purpose. How this young society was going to define itself politically, culturally and socially was a burning debate, one which would allow Harpur to give expression to his natural role. 

He would aim to be the poet as public figure. This was an aspiration that his dealings with the Sydney lawyer and influential literary patron N. D. Stenhouse no doubt encouraged. In 1859 Stenhouse invited Harpur to come to Sydney to give a lecture on poetry. Though still sheep-farming, Harpur obliged. His lecture, ‘The Nature and Offices of Poetry’, showed his familiarity with a wide range of poetry across the centuries and a practitioner’s inwardness with its forms and rhythmic possibilities. His lecture suggests that he could easily have become the foremost literary critic of his day in the colonies; and a number of other essays and notes reinforce the impression. But Harpur did not have the leisure to pursue this secondary vocation very far.

His poetry came first. It would traverse a wide historical terrain, which in turn meant addressing broader questions of ethics, aesthetics and political philosophy. The ambitiousness of his poetry, especially in light of his circumstances, is striking.

### <a name=MLL></a>Marriage and later life
Harpur met his wife-to-be Mary Doyle in 1843 on the Hunter. Some memorable love poems written to her survive; but her father would not countenance a marriage until the unworldly Harpur could support her. This finally happened in 1850 after he had worked for a period as a schoolteacher. He went on to do sheep-farming for several years, at first on his brother’s run where he also served as postmaster and pound-keeper, before setting up on his own. He tried without luck to borrow enough money from Parkes to buy land on the Barwon River. Finally in 1859 he secured a job as clerk to the gold commissioner at Braidwood, set amongst the bleak beauty of the high tablelands of south-eastern New South Wales. 

For the last months of 1859 Harpur lived there with his family. There were by now two sons and a daughter: Washington (born 1851), Charles Chidley (1853) and Ada Emily (1859); Mary Araluen Harpur would be born in 1861. Harpur first moved down to Araluen and its goldfield, then, in 1863, to the nearby Nerrigundah goldfield and finally, not far away, to the Tuross River near Bodalla. Each lush setting enjoyed the prospect of imposing mountains just to the west. It was at the Tuross River that he built the family home ‘Euroma’. He was fifty.

In this year he was promoted to Assistant Commissioner, adjudicating disputes amongst gold miners over their claims. His salary was £350 p.a. It would be his first and, as things turned out, his only well-remunerated job. He would die in 1868, broken in health following the death of his second son in a shooting accident the previous year and after having fought a long, humiliating battle for financial relief following his retrenchment from government service in 1866 during a budgetary crisis.

### <a name=NP></a>Newspaper poet
In his high ambition to become known as the singer of a nation-in-the-making, Harpur would be unsuccessful, at least as judged by the appearance of his works in conventional book form. The only significant exception was Harpur’s play *The Bushrangers*, published in Sydney in 1853 in a volume that also contained some of his poems. W. R. Piddington was the publisher. While it is possible that Parkes assisted with the costs no evidence has emerged to confirm it.

Besides this publication, only a handful of pamphlets and broadsheets appeared, including *Songs of Australia, First Series* printed by D. L. Welch in Sydney probably around 1850–51. Preserved in the Mitchell Library, this unique copy – which was either a broadsheet or a galley sheet, subsequently torn into segments – is pasted face down (it is not known by whom) to show what Harpur would newly write on the blank versos, which are face up. Unable to be read, the item typifies the essential problem in coming to grips with Harpur’s works, a problem that is both materially based and interpretative at once.

Harpur’s failure to achieve his longstanding aspiration for publication in London is unsurprising. In fact, no one in the Australian colonies was successful in carving out a professional literary career until near the end of the nineteenth century, and even then it was exceedingly rare. The London book trade dominated the colonial literary and bookselling scene, especially from the 1860s once large-scale book-distribution arrangements were put efficiently into operation in Melbourne and Sydney. There was little if any place locally for literary book-publishing unless financed by advance subscription or by the author. In 1874 George Robertson of Melbourne paid Marcus Clarke £50 for the copyright of His Natural Life, and there were other, similar experiments, although the evidence is thin. But when, in the mid-1890s, Angus & Robertson of Sydney introduced royalty-based or half-profits publishing where the publisher took the financial risk as a norm, it was widely hailed as a breakthrough for authors. [(2)](#FN2)

Harpur’s reception in his contemporary colonial print culture was nevertheless real. Some 788 appearances of poems by Harpur in colonial newspapers have now been identified. He published mainly in Sydney newspapers but also in those in the country areas in which he lived, including Maitland (near Singleton), Braidwood and Moruya (near Bodalla) and also, indeed, much further afield in Melbourne and Adelaide. There were almost certainly more appearances of his poems than we shall ever identify, as newspapers were not systematically collected by the fledgling public libraries of the time. 

In the 1860s his production, as judged by his newspaper appearances, fell away. With a well-paid job from 1863 the inducement of possible payments – that is, assuming there were actually any on offer for newspaper poems in prestigious newspapers such as the Sydney Morning Herald by then – would have been less urgent; [(3)](#FN3) and the demands of his job would presumably have occupied much of his available time. He explained the case in correspondence with the much younger poet Henry Kendall (born 1840). [(4)](#FN4) The latter approached Harpur in 1862 and proceeded enthusiastically to support his senior fellow-poet, acting as both a discerning commentator on Harpur’s earlier and new productions, and as his unpaid literary agent, placing the poems for publication with Sydney newspapers.

### <a name=APW></a>Author of a ‘Poetical Works’
By this time, Harpur despaired of his colonial reception and turned his attention instead to preparing for the long-hoped-for book publication of his Works in London. [(5)](#FN5) He studiously revised and rearranged his poems in manuscript books; they are preserved in the Mitchell Library in Sydney. But that intended publication was never to be; and Harpur died, from consumption, in the bitter knowledge of defeat. 
In 1883 his widow Mary Harpur managed to get a large selection of his poetry published by George Robertson in Melbourne. But they were abridged and bowdlerised by a literary friend to bring them up to date: that is, up to a date that is now itself only historical. The cost of the printing and binding was borne by relatives, and the book was sold by subscription in an attempt to recoup the anticipated outlay in advance. Despite this precaution, a large number of unbound copies, evidently left unsold, were reissued in 1899 in paperback format by the Sydney bookseller-publisher William Dymock, following a campaign over several years by Harpur’s loyal widow to achieve republication. [(6)](#FN6) She died in that same year.

**Paul Eggert**

July 2015

### Notes
<a name=FN1>1)</a> J. A. B. [James Martin], *Australian Sketch-Book* (Sydney: James Tegg, 1838), p. 150.

<a name=FN2>2)</a> See further, Paul Eggert, *Biography of a Book: Henry Lawson’s ‘While the Billy Boils’* (Sydney: Sydney University Press, 2013), p. 50 n. 11, p. 79 n. 15, p. 215 n. 49 and, for the literary income of Henry Lawson and Rolf Boldrewood in the 1880s and after, pp. 207–21. 

<a name=FN3>3)</a> No confirmatory evidence has emerged, and it is, in any case, unlikely he was paid for publications early in his career.

<a name=FN4>4)</a> See Timeline: Letter, CH to Henry Kendall, 9 November 1863.

<a name=FN6>5)</a> See Timeline: Letter, CH to Henry Kendall, 15 October 1867.

<a name=FN6>6)</a> See Timeline: Letter, Angus & Robertson (George Robertson) to Mary Harpur, 11 July 1896.

