### **Archival and Editorial Policy** 

### Archival scope of the Charles Harpur Critical Archive 
With the few exceptions listed below, the Charles Harpur Critical  Archive (CHCA) includes archival transcriptions of all known versions of  Harpur’s poems to 1900 – from ‘The Wreck’, published in the Australian  on 20 December 1833, to the three poems published in the *Windsor and  Richmond Gazette* on 23 March 1895. One of the latter, ‘The Coming On of  Freedom’, is of particular significance because it was submitted by Mary  Harpur ‘partly in print and partly in manuscript’. Mary worked  tirelessly after Harpur’s death in 1868 to promote his poetry, including  the (unfulfilled) ambition of publication in England, until her own  death in 1899 at the age of 82. The CHCA therefore aims to include all  versions dating from the nineteenth century, noting however that poems  anthologised after Harpur’s death, such as the four poems in volume 4 of  *The Poets and Poetry of the Nineteenth Century*, edited by Alfred H.  Miles, (London, 1892), which are identical to their appearance in the  1883 Poems, do not constitute new versions; their bibliographic details  are given in the editorial notes to Poems. 

The CHCA cannot claim to include every work or version ever composed by  Harpur. In addition to those whose whereabouts are unknown, the subtitle  of ‘Impromptu Stanzas’ in MS C376 in the Mitchell Library confirms that  some early works were destroyed: ‘Impromptu Stanzas. Addressed to a  Collection of the Author’s earliest Poems, while committing the  Manuscripts to the flames’. 

### Editorial scope of the CHCA 
The preparation of reading texts of all significant versions along with  textual commentary and annotation is the second phase of the CHCA  project. This editorial phase began in 2015 and will be ongoing for some  years. Publication releases will be made in tranches. The conventions  adopted for the editorial task and the silent categories of emendation  and reporting are still evolving and will be announced here in due  course. 

To reach authoritative conclusions about the textual circumstances of  each work the editorial phase requires a collation of variant versions  in a far more detailed, character-by-character form than the less  granulated kind needed for the archival phase. The latter has been able  to reveal that versions that would once have stood between presently  extant versions have in many cases been lost. But more thorough  collation using Multi-way Compare – a tool based on the Multi-Variant  Document (MVD) format, which is being refined for the CHCA – will shed  further light on the genealogy of variants, as well as adding more  certainty to the necessarily provisional dating and thus chronological  ordering of the manuscript versions. 

For those poems that have passed through the editorial phase, the  textual commentary provided in headnotes and editorial notes to each  version specifies, and discusses where necessary, the relationship of  versions to one another and describes Harpur’s revisional practice. 

Technically, the collations are only another visualisation of data  already computed in the MVDs when separating the textual layers of  writing and revision in manuscripts for viewing. It is then an  additional matter of computing the variation between versions. As the  editing proceeds these collations will gradually become available to  interested users – at first, two versions at a time but, later, in  multiple versions. (For further description of the tool and the MVD  format, see Technical Design.) 

### Sources 
The archival transcriptions of Harpur’s poems in the CHCA, on which the  edited reading texts are based, are sourced mainly from colonial  newspapers and the substantial collection of his manuscript books in the  Mitchell Library, State Library of New South Wales, Sydney. 

For a physical description, a summary of the contents and the number of  versions found in each of the 24 manuscript books, see [List of Sources](/harpur/tabs?tabset=sources). This List also gives the source of the 17 versions of  poems found in Harpur’s handwritten correspondence. Fifteen are  preserved at the Mitchell Library, one at the State Library of Victoria  and another at Trinity College, Melbourne. 
The [List of Sources](/harpur/tabs?tabset=sources) also enumerates the surprisingly wide range of  colonial newspapers and journals in which Harpur’s poetry appeared.  Nearly 50 in number, concentrated in Sydney and the New South Wales  country areas, they extended as far afield as Melbourne, Portland in  country Victoria and Adelaide, places Harpur never visited. The number  of newspapers would have been swelled by the 24 poems present in  unidentified newspaper cuttings in the manuscript books in the Mitchell,  and also probably by printings and reprintings in other newspapers that  have escaped attention so far or are no longer extant. 

Finally, the [List of Sources](/harpur/tabs?tabset=sources) gives bibliographic details of the  pamphlets and books published under Harpur’s name to 1900 and of the  appearances of his poems in anthologies until 1900. In each case, the  shelfmark in the holding library of the particular copy from which the  transcriptions were taken is given. Later anthology appearances (most of  which fall outside the CHCA’s cut-off date of 1900) are provided in the  separate [List of Poems in Anthologies to 2004](/harpur/para?docid=english/harpur/anthologiesto2004) [(1)](#FN1). 

### Preparation of the archival transcriptions 
Initial draft transcriptions of the Harpur manuscript books in the  Mitchell Library were prepared by the School of Cultural Records,  Jadavpur University, Kolkata. These XML files were then checked and  coded by CHCA digital archivist Meredith Sherlock, who also prepared  transcriptions of all the published sources and all the poems contained  in correspondence. 

Excluding the plays (which are not part of the CHCA),[(2)](#FN2) checked transcriptions of all the available poetic versions are included, with only a few exceptions (owing to resource constraints):
 
* ‘The Temple of Infamy’ H580b and, in a note to this poem, ‘A Sad Case’ H488a, both in MS A87-1, pp. 353–[380] * ‘Genius Lost’: draft versions in MS B78, pp. 1–156 and [second pagination] i–iv   

**where a manuscript version is difficult to transcribe** because of  illegibility or the unusual complexity of its revisions, an unchecked  transcription derived from the Kolkata XML files has been uploaded as an  interim measure. There are currently 36 of these; they are listed at the end of this document. Images of and metadata  for all the versions for which there is no transcription, or only an  unchecked one, are nonetheless available in the CHCA. 

**totals**: Not counting the plays there are 680 works in the CHCA in 2,694 versions. The  terminal year for the count is 1900. Of the 2,694 versions, 1,569 are in  manuscript (mostly Harpur autographs, with a few in Mary Harpur’s or their  son Washington Harpur’s hand), 672 in extant newspapers or magazines,  111 in non-extant newspapers with the versions surviving only as  cuttings (thus bringing the total known newspaper publications to 783), 190 in Harpur’s pamphlet, broadsheet and book publications,  114 as cuttings of newspapers or published sources with holograph  revisions (thus bringing the total known manuscript versions to 1683), 19 in correspondence and 19 in published anthologies. The count of versions excludes anthology reprintings to 1900 sourced from Harpur’s book publications. 

### Designation of poetic works and versions 
Before the draft transcriptions of the manuscript books could be checked  for accuracy and divided into appropriate units some basic decisions  needed to be made about the organisation and designation of their  contents for the CHCA. Here, the limitations of Holt and Perkins’s  *Finding List* soon became evident. [(3)](#FN3) While it originally  served as an invaluable resource, its design features were ill-suited to  an online environment. A number of errors were also identified. 

The *Finding List* information had therefore to be first reworked into a spreadsheet  before the CHCA could be populated with files and metadata. As  the division and checking of the draft transcriptions proceeded the  spreadsheet served as an organising convenience. The spreadsheet has been preserved as the [Table of Works](/harpur/works?projid=english/harpur) which allows sorting of all the poems by their idenfifiers (h-numbers), by date or by title, 

The main implications are as follows: 

* Each work in the CHCA has been assigned a unique numeric identifier  (e.g. H001), and then each version of that work has been given its own  associated alphabetic suffix (H001a, H001b etc.). The alphabetical order  of the version identifiers is loosely chronological, based on their  original order in the *Finding List*; but, as discoveries were made  during the CHCA project, the deletion and addition of versions rendered  their alphabetical ordering unreliable as a chronological indicator.  Similarly, the numerical identifiers derive from their position in the  printed *Finding List*, which presented them in alphabetical order by  title, a positioning of no relevance in a digital environment that  requires unique not sequential identifiers. Thus the fact that some H  numbers were dispensed with once duplicates in the Finding List were  identified, and that some version identifiers have similarly been  deleted or added, is of no consequence in the CHCA. 

* In his later years, Harpur reworked many of his poems into series or  sequences. Deciding whether to classify a poem as a work in its own  right or only as part of a larger work in the CHCA therefore became  necessary. The *Finding List’s* decision to adopt as the filing title  ‘the latest version transcribed or published in Harpur’s lifetime’ (p.  xxi) resulted in many of the poems being listed under their series  title, sometimes with a duplicate entry for earlier versions (e.g. ‘Love  in the Past’). In contrast, the CHCA privileges the ‘stand-alone’  version, and only uses a series/sequence title as the work title when  one or more of the poems in that series/sequence have no stand-alone  version (and sometimes no other title) and seem to have been conceived  as part of the series/sequence from the outset. These are ‘Autumnal  Leaves’ (numbered 1–6), ‘The Beautiful’ (I–IX), ‘Love the Idealiser’  (1–4), ‘A Lyrical Love Story’ (1:1– 3:5), ‘Records of a Poet’s Love’  (I–XXXIVb + Epilogue), ‘Rhymed Criticisms’ (I–XVI), ‘Similes from Homer’  (I–X) and ‘Sonnets Dedicated to Australian Senators’ (I–XVII). All of  the individual works in these series/sequences have unique (albeit  consecutive) H numbers. In addition, the series filing titles ‘Monodies  I’ and ‘Monodies II’ have been retained to differentiate two poems that  are both named ‘Obituary Lines’. * In contrast, a few poems have been deemed to be one work (and thus  with a single title) but in several parts: ‘The Famous Night Scene in  the VIII Iliad I–IV’ (H127-A, H127-B, H127-C, H127-D), ‘Genius Lost’  (H151-A to H151-W), and ‘A Supernaturalised Battle-Piece I–III’ (H575-A,  H575-B, H575-C), ‘The Beautiful I’ (H035) and ‘IA’ (H035-A), ‘The  Beautiful II’ (H036) and ‘IIA’ (H036-A), ‘Rhymed Criticisms III. Milton:  His Poetical Style’ (H463-A) and ‘His Minor Poems’ (H463-B), the 3 parts  of ‘Rhymed Criticisms VI. Pope’ (H466-A, B and C) and the 4 parts of  ‘XIII Coleridge’ (H473-A, B, C, D). * There are some works with the same title, and these are distinguished  by an editorially supplied number after the title in parentheses:  ‘Morning (1)’ and ‘(2)’, ‘A Regret (1)’ and ‘(2)’, ‘Song (1)’, ‘(2)’,  ‘(3)’, ‘(4)’ and ‘(5)’, ‘Sonnet (1)’ and ‘(2)’, ‘Stanzas (1)’ and ‘(2)’,  ‘To Mary (1)’ and ‘(2)’, ‘Why? (1)’ and ‘(2)’ and finally ‘Fragment  (1)’, ‘(2)’, ‘(3)’, ‘(6)’ and ‘(8)’ [the others called ‘Fragment’ were  identified as in fact being parts of other poems]. * The *Finding List’s* organisation of the parts of ‘The Famous Night  Scene’, ‘A Supernaturalised Battle-Piece’ and ‘The Tower of the Dream’  has been substantially modified. 

In summary, the designations of works and versions in the CHCA supersede  those of the *Finding List* but of course, like any other editorial  interpretation, remain open to argument. 

### Harpur’s notes, versions and titles 
In the CHCA, authorial notes that accompany poems are treated as  integral parts of the work. Harpur’s notes are often lengthy, with the  result that the CHCA contains at least as much Harpur prose as it does  verse. Nonetheless, notes to a poem are not included if the poem itself  is not present. 

Thus a number of manuscripts, MS C382 in particular, contain prose  notes, mostly in draft form, whose titles identify them with a  particular poem; but Harpur has not indicated they were to be attached.  They are interpreted as having been rejected or left aside for re-use,  perhaps for some later version that never materialised. These notes may  be referenced in the editorial notes to those poems, with links to their  images, but have not been transcribed. In summary, all versions  identified with an alphanumeric identifier contain Harpur’s verse, but  they may contain prose notes as well. 

**metadata provided for the transcription of each version** appears as a  headnote above the poem. It includes complete source information, date  of composition or publication (definite or provisional), series or  sequence (if applicable), number of lines of the poem, notes by the  newspaper or anthology editor if present, the number of the major  manuscript or other major collection the version belonged to (if any).  The edited reading texts provide similar categories of information but  it is further digested and accompanied by textual commentary and  annotation of biblical, literary, historical and other allusions,  including parallels with other works by Harpur. The editorial work is  ongoing. 

Harpur’s extant correspondence is summarised item by item, and extracts  are transcribed, in the Timeline section of the CHCA. 

The transcription of **poems in harpur correspondence** may include the  whole letter if it is short, otherwise enough of the text is provided to  give the poem context. Other ‘embedded’ poems are those quoted in full  in a note to another poem. Each embedded version has its own  alphanumeric identifier, but the reader will be directed to the note  where the embedded poem is found rather than see it presented out of  context. The programming for this feature, which avoids duplication of  the material, is still under construction. 

Poetic compositions include the two verse dramas ‘Death of an Editor’  and ‘The Death of Shylock’, and also the plays *The Bushrangers* in its  various forms and ‘King Saul’. Resource constraints have meant the  latter two plays could not be included. Also not included are Harpur’s  only known short story ‘The Importance of a Rhyme. A Story of the Old  Dock-Yard’ (published in the *Weekly Register* on 30 August 1845, also a  cutting in A92) and numerous **prose pieces** in his manuscripts or in  newspapers. 

**deciding what constitutes a version** (and therefore a work) is not a  straightforward matter. The series/sequence problem has been discussed  above. As Harpur continued to rework his poems throughout his life,  often substantially, a heavily revised poem might become virtually a new  work, and thus be better classified as such, rather than as another  version of the same work. For example: 

* The *Finding List*’s first three versions of ‘The Temple of Infamy’  (each is 34 lines in length) have been re-categorised as versions of a  separate work titled ‘Wentworth’ to which they closely relate, as these  lines were very much altered for their later inclusion in the much  longer ‘Temple’ of c. 500 lines. 
* In the case of ‘Wordsworth’s Poetry’ the work designation is  problematic: in MS A95 the first reading ‘How much, my Nora, in this  world—how much’ (as untitled ‘XXV’ in the series ‘Records of a Poet’s  Love’) was changed by Harpur to read ‘How much, O Wordsworth, in this  world—how much’, thus repurposing the poem via a radical change of  subject (p. 15). The first reading was not further transcribed, but the  second is found in the later MS A87-1. In this unique instance the two  states of the same transcription have been classed as versions of two  different works. 
* Again, ‘The Complaint’ (listed under ‘Petrarchian Musings’ in the  *Finding List*) is an early version of ‘Records of a Poet’s Love X’, but  the two have been deemed distinct enough to warrant separate work  identifiers. Similarly with ‘Delia’ and ‘Records of a Poet’s Love XVI’. * On the other hand, stanzas 2, 3 and 4 of ‘The Hunter’s Indian Dove’  are drawn from the earlier ‘My Sable Fair’. Thus these two *Finding List* entries are now treated as the same work, as are ‘Educational  Mottoes’ and ‘A School Motto’. 

Some **fragments** have been designated versions in their own right,  while others have not, unavoidably on a case-by-case basis. Thus in MS  B78, the 8-line fragment of ‘The “Nevers” of Poetry’ has been deemed a  version of a work, while the fragments in C380 are simply recorded in  the editorial note to the complete version of the poem in that source.  The justification for each decision may be found in the editorial  commentary.
 
**work titles** are generally those of the majority of versions of the  work in question, although they have occasionally been edited for  reasons of brevity, simplicity or consistency. This arrangement differs  from that in the *Finding List*, which, as noted above, used the title  of ‘the latest version transcribed or published in Harpur’s lifetime’.  Where no title exists for a particular version, the majority title  adopted by the CHCA is given in square brackets. Where a work surviving  as a single version is untitled, the first line of the poem is adopted  as the work title.
 
**version titles** that differ from the work title in the CHCA will be  added to the titles list, with links to enable cross-referencing. A  title deleted in a manuscript and replaced with another is not included  unless it also occurs in another source. Finally, it cannot be assumed  that newspaper titles are necessarily authorial. 

### Versions unlocated, deleted, added or missing 
A few of the versions in the *Finding List* could not be located and  have been deleted from the CHCA. ‘The Pirates’, ‘The Robbers’ and ‘The  Sea Captain’ were acknowledged as received by the *Sydney Times* on 23  September 1834, but no such published versions have been sighted. ‘The  Anchor’ was sent by Harpur to Henry Parkes in a letter of 4 March 1855,  but it has not survived. ‘To William Wordsworth’ (in C376, p. 594) is  not a version, but a scrap from Harpur’s pamphlet *Thoughts: A Series of  Sonnets* (1845): Harpur used it to write on the blank verso. 

Authorial revision in holograph on a newspaper cutting creates a new  version; but **unamended newspaper cuttings** are not classified as  versions separate from their original newspaper appearance since,  textually, they are the same thing. This is a significant departure from  the conventions of the *Finding List*; in this way, 106 versions have  been removed from consideration. The existence of each cutting has,  however, been recorded in an editorial note to the newspaper version  itself. The term ‘unamended’ has been interpreted to include those  situations where holograph corrections (rather than revisions) only  repair an obvious non-authorial typographical error in the printed  version. Again, this information will be found in the editorial note to  the newspaper version of the poem. 

With the benefit of [TROVE](http://trove.nla.gov.au) and other online  resources, the CHCA was also able to add 46 versions that were either  inadvertently omitted from the *Finding List* or not known to its  compilers. Further scanning of colonial newspapers for TROVE in the  future may reveal more. One new Harpur work has been discovered, but it is only a four-line fragment. It has been given an editorial title: 'Friendship is But a Word'. 

A small number of **versions for which no transcription or image is  currently available** remain in the CHCA. They are retained as  placeholders in the hope that publication of the CHCA will help to bring  them to light. They include five of the six poems in *Songs of  Australia*, described in Biographical Sketch. Of the six, ‘Mary of  Eulengo’ is legible as a cutting in MS C381, but the other poems survive  only on tear sheets pasted text-down in MS A92 with holograph poems  written on the blank versos. Horizontal rotation of the images allows  the poems to be identified and transcribed. 

**other anomalies** are: 

* A placeholder for a version of the ‘Prelude’ from ‘Genius Lost’,  unsighted by the *Finding List* compilers but perhaps known to them in an  unidentified secondary source, is included. Its unique first line is  strong evidence of its existence, though a search on TROVE has failed to  find the lines in the *Sydney Chronicle* (its likely but queried source,  according to the compilers) or any other paper of the period. 
* ‘A Harpur Discovery’ in *Southerly* 5 (1944) presents a holograph  version of the sonnet ‘To Doctor Lang’ in a copy of Harpur’s *The  Bushrangers* submitted by an anonymous contributor. The CHCA includes  the transcription from *Southerly*, but no image of the original  manuscript is available. 
* The *Finding List*’s version of ‘Epitaph on a Sailor’ given as  published in the *Empire* of 6 June 1857 has not been found. Its first  line matches that in the *Braidwood Dispatch* of 1861, but the entry  cannot be simply dismissed as a *Finding List* error. This version is  also retained as a placeholder. 
* Similarly treated are missing single versions of four other poems reported in the *Finding List*: ‘Epitaph on a Sailor’ H119b (not found in *Empire*); ‘Genius Lost. Prelude’ H151-Ab (not found in *Sydney Chronicle*); ‘The Losses of the Past’ H229c (cutting not found in a reported copy of *The Bushrangers*); and ‘Theodic Optimism H583c (ditto). 

### Editorial policy 
The texts are edited at the level of the version rather than the work.  This gives the reader access to edited versions of different works  written at roughly the same time, a significant matter in Harpur’s case.  The reader may also compare changes manifested in the successive  versions of a single work across biographical periods. Both avenues will  be of assistance to readers wanting to observe the unfolding of Harpur’s  *oeuvre*. 

Thus chronology rather than the traditional aim of final intentions has  been preferred as the principle of editorial organisation. The latter  principle, had it been preferred, would have encountered considerable  practical difficulties, themselves a reflection of Harpur’s working  methods and the confusing arrangement of his manuscript books in the  Mitchell Library. 

#### The ‘Major Manuscripts’ 
During 1867–68 Harpur transcribed and revised eleven collections, and  his son Washington copied out a twelfth after his father’s death. They  were subsequently bound together, without respecting their numbering and  are preserved, along with other handwritten versions and fragments,  within the Harpur manuscript books in the Mitchell Library. Of these  so-called ‘Major Manuscripts’ Elizabeth Perkins concluded in 2002: 

> The poems were written specifically for an English edition [which never  > eventuated]. They are not necessarily the versions or the poems he may have  > preferred to include in a representative collection of his work. They exclude some  > of Harpur’s longer poems and include only some sonnets from the sequence ‘Records  > of a Poet’s Love’. The twelve collections, however, constitute the last-known  > version of about half his poems. (*Finding List*, p. 220) 

A printed edition organised around final-intention principles might well  choose these versions as the basis of its reading texts. But that would  leave about half the poems without obvious contenders for selection and  with distinctly different early versions unrepresented except in textual  apparatus. 

There are two traditional ways of seeking clarification when attempting  to resolve the vexed question of textual authority. One way, which has  proved impossible to date, is to reconstruct the series of events that  would explain the present internal arrangement of the manuscript books,  which contain the Major Manuscripts and other materials: those acts of  copying, collection, ordering and re-ordering by Harpur before his death  in 1868, afterwards by his well-meaning family as they sought  publication, and subsequently by David Mitchell who bought the  collection from Mrs Harpur probably in the late 1890s (*Finding List*,  p. xii). There are plenty of codicological clues: the manuscripts are a  mixture of home binding, professional binding and subsequent Mitchell  Library binding, on paper of varying sizes and multiple, conflicting  paginations, and often with bound-in estrays. But the evidence is too  profuse and confusing to yield a decisive clarification. 

The other traditional way of establishing a series of events is textual  in orientation rather than documentary: that is, to transcribe and  collate all versions of the poems in the manuscript books against one  another and against all their printed counterparts, particularly in the  newspapers of the day. This task has proved possible. It has helped  establish or confirm textual relationships among versions and thus, to  some extent, the status or witness of the carrying documents. This  textual enquiry has gradually clarified, according to the circumstances  of each work, a chronology of composition, revision, early publication,  transcription and subsequent revision for later, actual or intended  publication. Inevitably, implications for understanding the manuscript  books as documentary collections arise from this textual analysis. They  are explored in the textual commentary to the individual versions, and  it well may be that a clearer picture than has emerged during the  archival phase will prove possible as the editing proceeds. 

The CHCA takes advantage of its digital medium and provides all  versions, enabling the reader to consult, if desired, the versions  intended for the English edition but equally also their earlier  versions, as well as all versions of the other poetic works. The  final-intentions question does not therefore trip up the editorial  effort. [(4)](#FN4) 

**Meredith Sherlock and Paul Eggert** 
July 2015 

### Addendum: 
List of unchecked transcriptions of manuscript versions * ‘Be Patient with a Fool’ H034b. A87-2 * ‘Dawn and Sunrise in the Snowy Mountains’ H085a. C376 * ‘The Death of Shelley’ H088b. C376 * ‘Early Summer’ H106e. A95 * ‘Hope On’ H177b. C382 * ‘Under the Wild Fig Tree’ H238a. C376 * ‘A Lyrical Love Story 1:9’ H264a. C376 * ‘A Lyrical Love Story 3:3’ H274b. C376 * ‘Monodies II’ H298a. A87-2 * ‘My Faith in Poetry] H311b. A93 * ‘The Fate of Poetic Genius’ H312d. A95 * ‘My Only Hate’ H323a. A87-2 * ‘Records of a Poet’s Love II’ H419d. A95 * ‘Records of a Poet’s Love IX’ H426e. A95 * ‘Records of a Poet’s Love XII’ H429c. A95 * ‘Records of a Poet’s Love XVI’ H433c. A95 * ‘Records of a Poet’s Love XVII’ H434d. A95 * ‘Records of a Poet’s Love XX’ H437d. A95 * ‘Records of a Poet’s Love XXIV’ H441c. A95 * ‘Rhymed Criticisms III. Milton. His Minor Poems’ H463-Bc. C376 * ‘Rhymed Critcicisms V. Dryden’ H465a. C382 * ‘Similes from Homer IX’ H509b. A87-2 * ‘Social Charity’ H517c. A95 * ‘Springtime Gladness’ H559c. C382 * ‘A Summer Night Scene’ H574b. C376 * ‘A Supernaturalised Battle-Piece I’ H575-Aa. B78 * ‘To a Friend’ H596c. A95 * ‘To Henry Parkes on Re-reading’ H611a. C382 * ‘To William Wordsworth’ H640f. A95 * ‘Vesper. A Rhyme for Children’ H661a. C382 * ‘Wicliffe’ H683c. A95 * ‘The Witch of Hebron’ H689a, H689b, H689c, H689d (all A90), H689f (C376) 
 
### Notes 
<a name=FN1>1.</a> A total of 192 partial or complete reprintings of  poems by Harpur in 66 anthologies have been located: 5 anthologies from  the 19th century, 57 from the 20th, and 4 from the early 21st. Also a  curio publication – 22 snippets from Harpur’s poems arranged by  calendar-day of the year in *The Australasian Birthday-Book* – appeared  in 1885. 

<a name=FN2>2.</a> I.e. the plays ‘King Saul’ in MS A87-2, pp. 559–98 and *The Bushrangers* in its published and manuscript versions. A transcription of *The Bushrangers* was prepared for  SETIS at the University of Sydney Library from [the print edition of  1853](http://purl.library.usyd.edu.au/setis/id/set0001). The CHCA makes  available images of the play from a rare copy of the book in the same  library (at shelfmark RB 1553.14). A checked transcription of roughly  half of an early version ‘The Tragedy of Donohoe’, published as fragments in the *Sydney  Monitor* in 1835, has been incorporated for the light it throws on the  young Harpur as poet, but it is not part of the count of poetic versions and works. It is thus a first step for any collaborator  wishing to add the plays to the CHCA. If the plays are added their version H numbers will be: ‘The Bushrangers’ H058a, H058b; ‘The Bush-Rangers’ H059a; ‘King Saul’ H210a, H210b; ‘Stalwart the Bushranger’ H566a, H566b. 

<a name=FN3>3.</a> *The Poems of Charles Harpur in Manuscript in the  Mitchell Library and in Publication in the Nineteenth Century: An  Analytical Finding List*, ed. Elizabeth Holt and Elizabeth Perkins  (Canberra: Australian Scholarly Editions Centre, 2002). 

<a name=FN4>4.</a> Appendix B in the *Finding List* gives further  description of the problems surrounding the Major Manuscripts and other  numbered collections (pp. 220–5). It also transcribes from C381 Mrs  Harpur’s contents list of groupings of poems, annotated ‘1890’ and  selected from the numbered collections, apparently in preparation for  book publication. But there are complications: some of the numbered  collections are no longer extant in the Harpur manuscript books at the  Mitchell Library; and a list, if not this one, would probably have been  prepared for the 1883 *Poems*. 
