## Overview

The Charles Harpur Critical Archive (CHCA) is a digital archive and a 
scholarly edition of the poetic works of Charles Harpur (1813–68).

### The editorial challenge

Harpur’s verse has been a fairly steady presence in the Australian 
cultural scene. However, the efforts of the interventionist early editor 
of his posthumous collection Poems (1883) were perpetuated in later 
selections and anthologisings. The resulting misrepresentation of his 
achievement was not recognised until the 1940s. Efforts were 
subsequently made to bring the whole body of his poetic work under 
editorial control but these either failed completely or involved 
compromises that deprived readers of the full picture.

In part, this was because Harpur was such a prolific poet and an 
inveterate reviser, and because the papers he left behind at his death 
fell into a confusing state over the following decades as his family 
sought to promote his reputation. Extant today are over 2,700 versions 
of his 686 works in verse, as well as the often fascinating prose notes 
that he wrote for them. Most of the versions have never been published.

### Archival and editorial policy

To address this situation the CHCA archives the basic materials for an 
edition (images and diplomatic transcriptions of the original documents, 
both handwritten and printed) and provides edited reading texts, 
together with textual commentary and explanatory notation. At first 
release in March 2016, the archival responsibility has been 
discharged. The editing is ongoing.

The texts are presented in transcription – and as edited, annotated and 
with textual commentary – at the level of the version rather than the 
work. This gives the reader access, via a Timeline, to versions of 
different works written at roughly the same time, a significant matter 
in Harpur’s case. The reader may also compare changes manifested in the 
successive versions of a single work across biographical periods.

### Technical design

In addition, ‘tools’ (software) allow the user to put image and 
transcription side by side, with their texts visually linked, and to 
compare versions of the same work, word by word if desired. A facility 
for collaborative contributions to the CHCA by its users is planned.

### Timelines

Entries on a biographical Timeline present the main events in Harpur’s 
life and milieu. This in turn generates the (separate) Biography, a 
series of biographical notes in readable prose, organised year-by-year. 
It amplifies events captured more briefly in the biographical Timeline 
and provides extra information and materials, including contemporary and 
historical photographs, links to images of relevant colonial-newspaper 
sources available online, and citations. Another Timeline summarises the 
subject matter of each item of Harpur’s surviving correspondence, and a 
third records the date (exact or approximate) of all his poetic 
compositions and publications, including those that appeared in colonial 
newspapers.

### Exclusions

The CHCA does not include Harpur’s plays (*The Bushrangers* and ‘King 
Saul’), nor his prose pieces written separately from his poems, although 
the technical design of the CHCA will allow them to be incorporated by 
collaborating scholars in the future. Nevertheless, all of the often 
extensive notes he wrote to accompany the poems are included. As a 
result, the CHCA presents rather more Harpur prose (most of it for the 
first time) than it does verse. The CHCA takes 1900 as its terminal 
date.

The publisher of the CHCA is Sydney University Press, a division of the 
University of Sydney Library, which archives the CHCA files permanently. 
Contributors are sought. See further, [Permissions, rights and acknowledgements](34).

